The Earth Is Round (p < .05)

_

Jacob Cohen

After 4 decades of severe criticism, the ritual of null hypothesis signiﬁcance testing—mechanical dichotomous
decisions around a sacred .05 criterion—still persists. This
article reviews the problems with this practice, including
its near-universal misinterpretation ofp as the probability
that H0 isfalse, the misinterpretation that its complement
is the probability of successful replication, and the mistaken assumption that ifone rejects H0 one thereby aﬂirms
the theory that led to the test. Exploratory data analysis
and the use ofgraphic methods, a steady improvement in
and a movement toward standardization in measurement,
an emphasis on estimating eﬂect sizes using conﬁdence
intervals, and the informed use of available statistical
methods is suggested. For generalization, psychologists
mustﬁnally rely; as has been done in all the older sciences,
on replication.
make no pretense of the originality of my remarks
in this article. One of the few things we, as psychologists, have learned from over a century of scientiﬁc
study is that at age three score and 10, originality is not
to be expected. David Bakan said back in 1966 that his
claim that “a great deal of mischief has been associated”
with the test of signiﬁcance “is hardly original,” that it
is “what ‘everybody knows.,”’ and that “to say it ‘out
loud‘ is . . . to assume the role of the child who pointed
out that the emperor was really outﬁtted in his underwear” (p. 423). If it was hardly original in 1966, it can
hardly be original now. Yet this naked emperor has been
shamelessly running around for a long time.
Like many men my age, I mostly grouse. My harangue today is on testing for statistical signiﬁcance, about
which Bill Rozeboom (1960) wrote 33 years ago, “The
statistical folkways of a more primitive past continue to
dominate the local scene” (p. 417).
And today, they continue to continue. And we, as
teachers, consultants, authors, and otherwise perpetrators
of quantitative methods, are responsible for the ritualization of null hypothesis signiﬁcance testing (NHST; I
resisted the temptation to call it statistical hypothesis inference testing) to the point of meaninglessness and beyond. I argue herein that NHST has not only failed to
support the advance of psychology as a science but also
has seriously impeded it.
Consider the following: A colleague approaches me
with a statistical problem. He believes that a generally
rare disease does not exist at all in a given population,
hence H0: P = O. He draws a more or less random sample
of 30 cases from this population and ﬁnds that one of the
cases has the disease, hence P, = 1/30 = .033. He is not
December 1994 - American Psychologist
Copyright I994 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0003-O66X/94/$2.00
Vol. 49. No. 12, 99?-1003

sure how to test H0, chi-square with Yates’s (1951) correction or the Fisher exact test, and wonders whether he
has enough power. Would you believe it? And would you
believe that if he tried to publish this result without a
signiﬁcance test, one or more reviewers might complain?
It could happen.
Almost a quarter of a century ago, a couple of sociologists, D. E. Morrison and R. E. Henkel (1970), edited
a book entitled The Signiﬁcance Test Controversy. Among
the contributors were Bill Rozeboom (1960), Paul Meehl
(1967), David Bakan (1966), and David Lykken (1968).
Without exception, they damned NHST. For example,
Meehl described NHST as “a potent but sterile intellectual rake who leaves in his merry path a long train of
ravished maidens but no viable scientiﬁc offspring” (p.
265). They were, however, by no means the ﬁrst to do so.
Joseph Berkson attacked NHST in I938, even before it
sank its deep roots in psychology. Lancelot Hogben’s
book-length critique appeared in 1957. When I read it
then, I was appalled by its rank apostasy. I was at that
time well trained in the current Fisherian dogma and had
not yet heard of Neyman-Pearson (try to ﬁnd a reference
to them in the statistics texts of that day—McNemar,
Edwards, Guilford, Walker). Indeed, I had already had
some dizzying success as a purveyor of plain and fancy
NHST to my fellow clinicians in the Veterans Administration.
What’s wrong with NHST? Well, among many other
things, it does not tell us what we want to know, and we
so much want to know what we want to know that, out
of desperation, we nevertheless believe that it does! What
we want to know is “Given these data, what is the probability that H0 is true?” But as most of us know, what it
tells us is “Given that H0 is true, what is the probability
of these (or more extreme) data?” These are not the same,
as has been pointed out many times over the years by the
contributors to the Morrison-Henkel (1970) book, among
J. Bruce Overmier served as action editor for this article.
This article was originally an address given for the Saul B. Sells
Memorial Lifetime Achievement Award, Society of Multivariate Experimental Psychology, San Pedro, California, October 29, I993.
I have made good use of the comments made on a preliminary
draft of this article by Patricia Cohen and other colleagues: Robert P.
Abelson, David Bakan, Michael Borenstein, Robyn M. Dawes, Ruma
Falk, Gerd Gigerenzer, Charles Greenbaum, Raymond A. Katzell, Donald F. Klein, Robert S. Lee, Paul E. Meehl, Stanley A. Mulaik, Robert
Rosenthal, William W. Rozeboom, Elia Sinaiko, Judith D. Singer, and
Bruce Thompson. I also acknowledge the help I received from reviewers
David Lykken, Matt McGue, and Paul Slovic.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Jacob
Cohen, Department of Psychology, New York University, 6 Washington
Place, 5th Floor, New York, NY l00O3.

997

others, and, more recently and emphatically, by Meehl
(I978, 1986, 1990a, l990b), Gigerenzer(l993), Falk and
Greenbaum (in press), and yours truly (Cohen, I990).

The Permanent Illusion
One problem arises from a misapplication of deductive
syllogistic reasoning. Falk and Greenbaum (in press)
called this the “illusion of probabilistic proof by contradiction” or the “illusion of attaining improbability.” Gigerenzer (I993) called it the “permanent illusion” and the
“Bayesian ld’s wishful thinking,” part of the “hybrid
logic” of contemporary statistical inference--a mishmash
of Fisher and Neyman-Pearson, with invalid Bayesian
interpretation. It is the widespread belief that the level of
signiﬁcance at which HO is rejected. say .05, is the probability that it is correct or, at the very least, that it is of
low probability.
The following is almost but not quite the reasoning
of null hypothesis rejection:
If the null hypothesis is correct, then this datum (D) can not
occun
It has, however, occurred.
Therefore, the null hypothesis is false.

If this were the reasoning ofH0 testing, then it would
be formally correct. It would be what Aristotle called the
modus tollens, denying the antecedent by denying the
consequent. But this is not the reasoning of NHST. Instead. it makes this reasoning probabilistic, as follows:
If the null hypothesis is correct, then these data are highly unlikely.
These data have occurred.
Therefore, the null hypothesis is highly unlikely.

By making it probabilistic, it becomes invalid. Why?
Well, consider this:
The following syllogism is sensible and also the formally correct modus tollens:
If a person is a Martian, then he is not a member of Congress.
This person is a member of Congress.
Therefore. he is not a Martian.

Sounds reasonable, no? This next syllogism is not
sensible because the major premise is wrong, but the reasoning is as before and still a formally correct modus
tollens:
If a person is an American, then he is not a member of Congress.
(WRONG!)
.
This person is a member of Congress.
Therefore, he is not an American.

If the major premise is made sensible by making it
probabilistic, not absolute, the syllogism becomes formally incorrect and leads to a conclusion that is not sensible:
If a person is an American, then he is probably not a member
of Congress. (TRUE, RIGHT?)
This person is a member of Congress.
in

998

___'

j

4i

in

1

1

i

1

Therefore, he is probably not an American. (Pollard &
Richardson, I987)

This is formally exactly the same as
If HO is true, then this result (statistical signiﬁcance) would
probably not occur.
This result has occurred.
Then H0 is probably not true and therefore formally invalid.

This formulation appears at least implicitly in article after
article in psychological journals and explicitly in some
statistics textbooks—“the illusion of attaining improbability.”

Why P(DIHo) ab P(HoID)
When one tests H0, one is ﬁnding the probability that the
data (D) could have arisen if H0 were true, P(D|H0). If
that probability is small, then it can be concluded that if
H0 is true, then D is unlikely. Now, what really is at issue,
what is always the real issue, is the probability that H0 is
true, given the data, P(H0{D), the inverse probability.
When one rejects H0, one wants to conclude that H0 is
unlikely, say, p < .01. The very reason the statistical test
is done is to be able to reject H0 because of its unlikelihood! But that is the posterior probability, available only
through Bayes’s theorem, for which one needs to know
P(H0), the probability of the null hypothesis before the
experiment, the “prior” probability.
Now, one does not normally know the probability
of H0. Bayesian statisticians cope with this problem by
positing a prior probability or distribution of probabilities.
But an example from psychiatric diagnosis in which one
knows P(H0) is illuminating:
The incidence of schizophrenia in adults is about
2%. A proposed screening test is estimated to have at least
95% accuracy in making the positive diagnosis (sensitivity) and about 97% accuracy in declaring normality
(speciﬁcity). Formally stated, P(normal 1 H0) aw .97,
P(schizophrenia§H,) > .95. So. let
H0 = The case is normal, so that
H, I The case is schizophrenic, and
D = The test result (the data) is positive for schizophrenia.

With a positive test for schizophrenia at hand,
given the more than .95 assumed accuracy of the test,
P(D § H@.)—the probability of a positive test given that the
case is normal-—is less than .05, that is, signiﬁcant at p
< .05. One would reject the hypothesis that the case is
normal and conclude that the case has schizophrenia, as
it happens mistakenly, but within the .05 alpha error. But
that’s not the point.
The probability of the case being normal, P(HO),
given a positive test (D), that is, P(H0 I D), is not what has
just been discovered however much it sounds like it and
however much it is wished to be. It is not true that the
probability that the case is normal is less than .05, nor is
it even unlikely that it is a normal case. By a Bayesian
maneuver, this inverse probability, the probability that

F

December I994 - American Psychologist

the case is normal, given a positive test for schizophrenia,
is about .60! The arithmetic follows:

_,

P(H0),f,P_(f¢§t Wrong i H0),,_,, ,__

_

P(H0)*P(test wrongIH0) + P(H,)*P(test correct I H1)
(.93)(.03)

incidentally offered an explanation of the neglect of power
analysis because of the near universality of this inverse
probability error:
‘

P(H0lD)
_

psychologists studied by Oakes (1986, pp. 79-82). Oakes

hypothesis being false? (p. 83)

.0294

(.9s)(.03) + (.02)(.95) T 100294 + .0190 P 607
The situation may be made clearer by expressing it
approximately as a 2 >< 2 table for 1,000 cases. The case
actually is
Result

Normal

Schiz

Total

Negative test (Normal)
Positive test (Schiz)
Total

949
30
979

1
20
21

950
50
I ,000

As the table shows, the conditional probability of a
normal case for those testing as schizophrenic is not
small--of the 50 cases testing as schizophrenics, 30 are
false positives, actually normal, 60% of them!
This extreme result occurs because of the low base
rate for schizophrenia, but it demonstrates how wrong
one can be by considering the p value from a typical signiﬁcance test as bearing on the truth of the null hypothesis
for a set of data.
It should not be inferred from this example that all
null hypothesis testing requires a Bayesian prior. There
is a form of H0 testing that has been used in astronomy
and physics for centuries, what Meehl (1967) called the
“strong” form, as advocated by Karl Popper (1959). Popper proposed that a scientiﬁc theory be tested by attempts
to falsify it. In null hypothesis testing terms, one takes a
central prediction of the theory, say, a point value of some
crucial variable, sets it up as the H0, and challenges the
theory by attempting to reject it. This is certainly a valid
procedure, potentially even more useful when used in
conﬁdence interval form. What I and my ilk decry is the
“weak” form in which theories are “conﬁrmed” by rejecting null hypotheses.
The inverse probability error in interpreting H0 is
not reserved for the great unwashed, but appears many
times in statistical textbooks (although frequently together
with the correct interpretation, whose authors apparently
think they are interchangeable). Among the distinguished
authors making this error are Guilford, Nunnally, Anastasi, Ferguson, and Lindquist. Many examples of this
error are given by Robyn Dawes (I988, pp. 70-75); Falk
and Greenbaum (in press); Gigerenzer (1993, pp. 316329), who also nailed R. A. Fisher (who emphatically
rejected Bayesian theory of inverse probability but slipped
into invalid Bayesian interpretations of NHST (p. 318);
and Oakes (I986, pp. I7-20), who also nailed me for this
error (p. 20).
The illusion of attaining improbability or the Bayesian Id’s wishful thinking error in using NHST is very
easy to make. It was made by 68 out of 70 academic
December I994 - American Psychologist

After all, why worry about the probability of obtaining data
that will lead to the rejection of the null hypothesis if it is false
when your analysis gives you the actual probability of the null

A problem that follows readily from the Bayesian
Id’s wishful thinking error is the belief that after a successful rejection of H0, it is highly probable that replications of the research will also result in H0 rejection. In
their classic article “The Belief in the Law of Small Numbers,” Tversky and Kahneman (1971) showed that because peopIe’s intuitions that data drawn randomly from
a population are highly representative, most members of
the audience at an American Psychological Association
meeting and at a mathematical psychology conference
believed that a study with a signiﬁcant result would replicate with a signiﬁcant result in a small sample (p. I05).
Of Oakes’s (1986) academic psychologists 42 out of 70
believed that a t of 2.7, with df= 18 and p = .01, meant
that if the experiment were repeated many times, a signiﬁcant result would be obtained 99% of the time. Rosenthal (I993) said with regard to this replication fallacy
that “Nothing could be further from the truth” (p. 542f)
and pointed out that given the typical .50 level of power
for medium effect sizes at which most behavioral scientists
work (Cohen, 1962), the chances are that in three replications only one in eight would result in signiﬁcant results,
in all three replications, and in ﬁve replications, the
chance of as many as three of them being signiﬁcant is
only 50:50.
An error in elementary logic made frequently by
NHST proponents and pointed out by its critics is the
thoughtless, usually implicit, conclusion that if H0 is rejected, then the theory is established: If A then B; B therefore A. But even the valid form of the syllogism (if A then
B; not B therefore not A) can be misinterpreted. Meehl
(1990a, 1990b) pointed out that in addition to the theory
that led to the test, there are usually several auxiliary
theories or assumptions and ceteris paribus clauses and
that it is the logical product of these that is counterpoised
against H0. Thus, when H0 is rejected, it can be because
of the falsity of any of the auxiliary theories about instrumentation or the nature of the psyche or of the ceteris
paribus clauses, and not of the substantive theory that
precipitated the research.
So even when used and interpreted “properly,” with
a signiﬁcance criterion (almost always p < .05) set a priori
(or more frequently understood), H0 has little to commend it in the testing of psychological theories in its usual
reject-H0-conﬁrm-the-theory form. The ritual dichotomous reject—accept decision, however objective and administratively convenient, is not the way any science is
done. As Bill Rozeboom wrote in I960, “The primary
aim of a scientiﬁc experiment is not to precipitate decisions, but to make an appropriate adjustment in the de999

gree to which one . . . believes the hypothesis . . . being
tested” (p. 420)

The Nil Hypothesis
Thus far, I have been considering Hos in their most general
sense—as propositions about the state of affairs in a population, more particularly, as some speciﬁed value of a
population parameter. Thus, “the population mean difference is 4” may be an H0, as may be “the proportion
of males in this population is .75” and “the correlation
in this population is .20.” But as almost universally used,
the null in H0 is taken to mean nil, zero. For Fisher, the
null hypothesis was the hypothesis to be nulliﬁed. As if
things were not bad enough in the interpretation, or misinterpretation, of NHST in this general sense, things get
downright ridiculous when H0 is to the effect that the
effect size (ES) is 0--that the population mean difference
is 0, that the correlation is 0, that the proportion of males
is .50, that the raters’ reliability is 0 (an H0 that can almost
always be rejected, even with a small sample—Heaven
help usl). Most of the criticism of NHST in the literature
has been for this special case where its use may be valid
only for true experiments involving randomization (e.g.,
controlled clinical trials) or when any departure from
pure chance is meaningful (as in laboratory experiments
on clairvoyance), but even in these cases, conﬁdence intervals provide more information. I henceforth refer to
the H0 that an ES = 0 as the “nil hypothesis.”
My work in power analysis led me to realize that the
nil hypothesis is always false. If I may unblushingly quote
myself,
It can only be true in the bowels of a computer processor running
a Monte Carlo study (and even then a stray electron may make
it false). If it is false, even to a tiny degree, it must be the case
that a large enough sample will produce a signiﬁcant result and
lead to its rejection. So if the null hypothesis is always false,
what’s the big deal about rejecting it? (p. 1308)

l wrote that in 1990. More recently I discovered that
in I938, Berkson wrote
It would be agreed by statisticians that a large sample is always
better than a small sample. If, then, we know in advance the P
that will result from an application of the Chi-square test to a
large sample, there would seem to be no use in doing it on a
smaller one. But since the result of the former test is known, it
is no test at all. (p. 526f)

Tukey (I991) wrote that “It is foolish to ask ‘Are
the effects of A and B different?’ They are always different—for some decimal place” (p. 100).
The point is made piercingly by Thompson (-1992):
Statistical signiﬁcance testing can involve a tautological logic in
which tired researchers, having collected data on hundreds of
subjects, then. conduct a statistical test to evaluate whether there
were a lot of subjects, which the researchers already know, because they collected the data and know they are tired. This
tautology has created considerable damage as regards the cumulation of knowledge. (p. 436)

In an unpublished study, Meehl and Lykken crosstabulated 15 items for a sample of 57,000 Minnesota

high school students, including father’s occupation, father’s education, mother’s education, number of siblings,
sex, birth order, educational plans, family attitudes toward
college, whether they liked school, college choice, occupational plan in I0 years, religious preference, leisure time
activities, and high school organizations. All of the 105
chi-squares that these 15 items produced by the crosstabulations were statistically signiﬁcant, and 96% ofthem
at p < .00000I (Meehl, 1990b).
One might say, “With 57,000 cases, relationships as
small as a Cramef qt» of .02-.03 will be signiﬁcant at p <
.000001, so what’s the big deal?” Well, the big deal is that
many of the relationships were much larger than .03. Enter the Meehl “crud factor,” more genteelly called by
Lykken “the ambient correlation noise.” In soft psychology, “Everything is related to everything else.” Meehl
acknowledged (1990b) that neither he nor anyone else
has accurate knowledge about the size of the crud factor
in a given research domain, “but the notion that the correlation between arbitrarily paired trait variables will be,
while not literally zero, ofsuch minuscule size as to be of
no importance, is surely wrong” (p. 212, italics in original).
Meehl (1986) considered a typical review article on
the evidence for some theory based on nil hypothesis testing that reports a 16:4 box score in favor of the theory.
After taking into account the operation of the crud factor,
the bias against reporting and publishing “negative” results (Rosenthal’s, 1979, “ﬁle drawer” problem), and assuming power of .75, he estimated the likelihood ratio of
the theory against the crud factor as 1:1. Then, assuming
that the prior probability of theories in soft psychology
is 5.10, he concluded that the Bayesian posterior probability is also s.l0 (p. 327f). So a 16:4 box score for a
theory becomes, more realistically, a 9:1 odds ratio
against it.
Meta-analysis, with its emphasis on effect sizes, is a
bright spot in the contemporary scene. One of its major
contributors and proponents, Frank Schmidt (1992),
provided an interesting perspective on the consequences
of current NHST-driven research in the behavioral sciences. He reminded researchers that, given the fact that
the nil hypothesis is always false, the rate of Type I errors
is 0%, not 5%, and that only Type II errors can be made,
which run typically at about 50% (Cohen, 1962; Sedlmeier
& Gigerenzer, 1989). He showed that typically, the sample
effect size necessary for signiﬁcance is notably larger than
the actual population effect size and that the average of
the statistically signiﬁcant effect sizes is much larger than
the actual effect size. The result is that people who do
focus on effect sizes end up with a substantial positive
bias in their effect size estimation. Furthermore, there is
the irony that the “sophisticates” who use procedures to
adjust their alpha error for multiple tests (using Bonferroni, Newman-Keuls, etc.) are adjusting for a nonexistent
alpha error, thus reduce their power, and, if lucky enough
to get a signiﬁcant result, only end up grossly overestimating the population effect size!
Because NHST p values have become the coin of
the realm in much of psychology, they have served to
iIq

I 000

i

i

1'

W

$2

December 1994 - American Psychologist

inhibit its development as a science. Go build a quantitative science with p values! All psychologists know that
statistically signiﬁcant does not mean plain-English signiﬁcant, but if one reads the literature, one often discovers
that a ﬁnding reported in the Results section studded
with asterisks implicitly becomes in the Discussion section highly signiﬁcant or very highly signiﬁcant, important, big!
Even a correct interpretation of p values does not
achieve very much, and has not for a long time. Tukey
(I991) warned that if researchers fail to reject a nil hypothesis about the difference between A and B, all they
can say is that the direction of the difference is “uncertain.” If researchers reject the nil hypothesis then they
can say they can be pretty sure of the direction, for example, “A is larger than B.” But if all we, as psychologists,
learn from a research is that A is larger than B (p < .01),
we have not learned very much. And this is typically all
we learn. Conﬁdence intervals are rarely to be seen in
our publications. In another article (Tukey, 1969), he
chided psychologists and other life and behavior scientists
with the admonition “Amount, as well as direction is
vital” and went on to say the following:
The physical scientists have learned much by storing up
amounts, not just directions. If, for example, elasticity had been
conﬁned to “When you pull on it, it gets longerl,” Hooke’s law,
the elastic limit, plasticity, and many other important topics
could not have appeared (p. 86). . . . Measuring the right things
on a communicable scale lets us stockpile information about
amounts. Such information can be useful, whether or not the
chosen scale is an interval scale. Before the second law of thermodynamics-and there were many decades of progress in
physics and chemistry before it appeared—the scale of temperature was not, in any nontrivial sense, an interval scale. Yet
these decades of progress would have been impossible had physicists and chemists refused either to record temperatures or to
calculate with them. (p. 80)

In the same vein, Tukey (1969) complained about
correlation coefficients, quoting his teacher, Charles
Winsor, as saying that they are a dangerous symptom.
Unlike regression coefficients, correlations are subject to
vary with selection as researchers change populations. He
attributed researchers’ preference for correlations to their
avoidance of thinking about the units with which they
measure.
Given two perfectly meaningless variables, one is reminded of
their meaninglessness when a regression coefficient is given, since
one wonders how to interpret its value. . . . Being so uninterested in our variables that we do not care about their units can
hardly be desirable. (p. 89)

The major problem with correlations applied to research data is that they can not provide useful information
on causal strength because they change with the degree
of variability of the variables they relate. Causality operates on single instances, not on populations whose
members vary. The effect of A on B for me can hardly
depend on whether I’m in a group that varies greatly in
A or another that does not vary at all. It is not an accident
December 1994 - American Psychologist

that causal modeling proceeds with regression and not
correlation coefficients. In the same vein, I should note
that standardized effect size measures, such as d and ji
developed in power analysis (Cohen, I988) are, like correlations, also dependent on population variability of the
dependent variable and are properly used only when that
fact is kept in mind .
To work constructively with “raw” regression coefﬁcients and conﬁdence intervals, psychologists have to
start respecting the units they work with, or develop measurement units they can respect enough so that researchers in a given ﬁeld or subﬁeld can agree to use them. In
this way, there can be hope that researchers’ knowledge
can be cumulative. There are few such in soft psychology.
A beginning in this direction comes from meta-analysis,
which, whatever else it may accomplish, has at least focused attention on effect sizes. But imagine how much
more fruitful the typical meta-analysis would be if the
research covered used the same measures for the constructs they studied. Researchers could get beyond using
a mass of studies to demonstrate convincingly that “if
you pull on it, it gets longer.”
Recall my example of the highly signiﬁcant correlation between height and intelligence in 14,000 school
children that translated into a regression coeﬂicient that
meant that to raise a child’s IQ from 100 to 130 would
require giving enough growth hormone to raise his or her
height by I4 feet (Cohen, 1990).

What to Do?
First, don’t look for a magic alternative to NHST, some
other objective mechanical ritual to replace it. It doesn’t
exist.

Second, even before we, as psychologists, seek to
generalize from our data, we must seek to understand
and improve them. A major breakthrough to the approach to data, emphasizing “detective work” rather than
“sanctiﬁcation” was heralded by John Tukey in his article
“The Future of Data Analysis” (1962) and detailed in his
seminal book Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA; 1977).
EDA seeks not to vault to generalization to the population
but by simple, ﬂexible, informal, and largely graphic
techniques aims for understanding the set of data in hand.
Important contributions to graphic data analysis have
since been made by Tufte (I983, 1990), Cleveland (1993;
Cleveland & McGill, 1988), and others. An excellent
chapter-length treatment by Wainer and Thissen (1981),
recently updated (Wainer & Thissen, 1993), provides
many useful references, and statistical program packages
provide the necessary software (see, for an example, Lee
Wilkinson’s [1990] SYGRAPH, which is presently being
updated).
Forty-two years ago, Frank Yates, a close colleague
and friend of R. A. Fisher, wrote about Fisher’s “Statistical
Methods for Research Workers” (1925/195 1),
It has caused scientiﬁc research workers to pay undue attention
to the results of the tests of signiﬁcance they perform on their
data . . . and too little to the estimates of the magnitude of the
effects they are estimating (p. 32).

1001!

Thus, my third recommendation is that, as researchers, we routinely report eﬁect sizes in the form of
conﬁdence limits. “Everyone knows” that conﬁdence intervals contain all the information to be found in significance tests and much more. They not only reveal the
status of the trivial nil hypothesis but also about the status
of non-nil null hypotheses and thus help remind researchers about the possible operation of the crud factor.
Yet they are rarely to be found in the literature. I suspect
that the main reason they are not reported is that they
are so embarrassingly large! But their sheer size should
move us toward improving our measurement by seeking
to reduce the unreliable and invalid part of the variance
in our measures (as Student himself recommended almost
a century ago). Also, their width provides us with the
analogue of power analysis in signiﬁcance testing-larger
sample sizes reduce the size of conﬁdence intervals as
they increase the statistical power of NHST. A new program covers conﬁdence intervals for mean differences,
correlation, cross-tabulations (including odds ratios and
relative risks), and survival analysis (Borenstein, Cohen,
& Rothstein, in press). It also produces Birnbaum’s ( 1961)
“conﬁdence curves,” from which can be read all conﬁdence intervals from 50% to 100%, thus obviating the
necessity of choosing a speciﬁc conﬁdence level for presentation.
As researchers, we have a considerable array of statistical techniques that can help us ﬁnd our way to theories
of some depth, but they must be used sensibly and be
heavily informed by informed judgment. Even null hypothesis testing complete with power analysis can be useful if we abandon the rejection of point nil hypotheses
and use instead “good-enough” range null hypotheses
(e.g., “the effect size is no larger than 8 raw score units,
or d = .5), as Serlin and Lapsley (1993) have described
in detail. As our measurement and theories improve, we
can begin to achieve the Popperian principle of representing our theories as null hypotheses and subjecting
them to challenge, as Meehl (1967) argued many years
ago. With more evolved psychological theories, we can
also ﬁnd use for likelihood ratios and Bayesian methods
(Goodman, 1993; Greenwald, 1975). We quantitative behavioral scientists need not go out of business.
Induction has long been a problem in the philosophy
of science. Meehl (1990a) attributed to the distinguished
philosopher Morris Raphael Cohen the saying “All logic
texts are divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst part, on deductive logic, the fallacies are explained; in the second
part, on inductive logic, they are committed” (p. 110).
We appeal to inductive logic to move from the particular
results in hand to a theoretically useful generalization.
As I have noted, we have a body of statistical techniques,
that, used intelligently, can facilitate our eﬁbrts. But given
the problems of statistical induction, we must ﬁnally rely,
as have the older sciences, on replication.
REFERENCES

Bakan, D. (1966). The test of signiﬁcance in psychological research.
Ps_vchological Bulletin, 66, l-29.

1002

Berkson, J . (1938). Some difficulties of interpretation encountered in
the application of the chi-square test. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 33, 526-542.
Birnbaum, A. (1961). Conﬁdence curves: An omnibus technique for
estimation and testing statistical hypotheses. Journal ofthe American
Statistical Association, 56, 246-249.
Borenstein, M., Cohen, J ., & Rothstein, H. (in press). Conﬁdence intervals. e/jfect size. and power [Computer program]. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cleveland, W. S. (1993). Vi'suali'zi'ng data. Summit, NJ: Hobart.
Cleveland, W. S., & McGill, M. E. (Eds.). (1988). Dynamic graphicsjor
statistics. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Cohen. J. (1962). The statistical power ofabnormal-social psychological
research: A review. Journal of'Al>norinal and Social Ps_vcholog_t-1 69,
145-153.

Cohen. J. (1988). Statistical power anal_vsis'_for the behavioral sciences
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale. NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohen, J . (1990). Things l have learned (so far). American Psychologist.
45, 1304-1312.
Dawes, R. M. (1988). Rational choice in an uncertain world. San Diego,
CA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Falk, R., & Greenbaum, C. W. (in press). Signiﬁcance tests die hard:
The amazing persistence of a probabilistic misconception. Theory
and Psychology.
Fisher, R. A. (1951). Statistical rnethodsfor research workers. Edinburgh,
Scotland: Oliver & Boyd. (Original work published 1925)
Gigerenzer, G. (I993). The superego, the ego, and the id in statistical
reasoning. In G. Keren & C. Lewis (Ed.), A handboolcfor data anal_v.s'is
in the behavioral sciences." Methodological issues (pp. 31 1-339).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goodman, S. N. (i993). P values, hypothesis tests, and likelihood implications for epidemiology: Implications of a neglected historical debate. American Journal oflfpiderniology, I 3 7, 485-496.
Greenwald, A. G. (1975). Consequences of prejudice against the null
hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin. 82, 1-20.
Hogben, L. (1957). Statistical theory. London: Allen & Unwin.
Lykken, D. E. (1968). Statistical signiﬁcance in psychological research.
Psychological Bulletin, 70. 151-159.
Meehl, P. E. (1967). Theory testing in psychology and physics: A methodological paradox. Philosophy ofScience, 34, 103-115.
Meehl. P. E. (1978). Theoretical risks and tabular asterisks: Sir Karl, Sir
Ronald. and the slow progress ofsoft psychology. Journal ofConsulting
and Clinical Ps,vcholog_t-1 46, 806-834.
Meehl, P. E. (1986). What social scientists don’t understand. In D. W.
Fiske & R. A. Shweder (Eds.), Metatheory in social science: Pluralisms
and sulijectivities (pp. 315-338). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Meehl, P. (1990a). Appraising and amending theories: The strategy of
Lakatosian defense and two principles that warrant it. Psychological
Inquiry, I, 108-141.
Meehl, P. E. (1990b). Why summaries of research on psychological theories are often uninterpretable. Psychological Reports. 66(Monograph
Suppl. 1-V66), 195-244.
Morrison. D. E., & Henkel, R. E. (Eds). (1970). The signiﬁcance test
controversji Chicago: Aldine.
Oakes, M. (1986). Statistical inference: A comrnentaryfor the social and
behavioral sciences. New York: Wiley.
Pollard, P., & Richardson. J. T. E. (1987). On the probability of making
Type I errors. Ps_vchological Bulletin, 102, 159-163.
Popper, K. (1959). The logic ofscientiﬁc discovery London: Hutchinson.
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The “ﬁle drawer problem" and tolerance for null
results. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 638-641.
Rosenthal, R. (1993). Cumulating evidence. In G. Keren & C. Lewis
(Ed.), A handbook for data analysis in the behavioral sciences: Methodological issues (pp. 519-559). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rozeboom, W. W. (1960). The fallacy of the null hypothesis signiﬁcance
test. Psychological Bulletin, 57, 416-428.
Schmidt, F. L. (1992). What do data really mean‘? Research ﬁndings,
meta-analysis, and cumulative knowledge in psychology. American
Psychologist, 47. 1173-1181.

Sedlmeier, P., & Gigerenzer, G. (1989). Do studies of statistical power

December 1994 - American Psychologist

have an effect on the power of studies? Psychological Bulletin, 105.
309-316.
Serlin, R. A., & Lapsley, D. K. (1993). Rational appraisal of psychological
research and the good-enough principle. In G. Keren & C. Lewis
(Eds.). A handbookfor data analysis" in the behavioral sciences: Methodological issues (pp. 199-228). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thompson, B. (1992). Two and one-halfdecades of leadership in measurement and evaluation. Journal of Counseling and Development,
70. 434-438.
Tufte. E. R. (1983). The visual display o/'qttantitative inlorinati'on.
Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
Tufte. E. R. (1990). Envisioning information. Cheshire. CT: Graphics
Press.
Tukey. J . W. (1962). The future of data analysis. Annals ol'Mathernatical
Stati.s'tics, 33, 1-67.
Tukey, J. W. (1969). Analyzing data: Sanctiﬁcation or detective work?
American Psychologist, 24, 83-91.

December 1994 - American Psychologist

Tukey, J. W. (1977). Exploratory data analysis. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
Tukey. J . W. ( 1991). The philosophy of multiple comparisons. Statistical
Science, 6, 100-116.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman. D. (1971). Belief in the law of small numbers.
Psychological Bulletin, 76, 105-110.
Wainer, H.. & Thissen, D. (1981)- Graphical data analysis. In M. R.
Rosenzweig & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Annual review o/'p.sycholog_v (pp.
191-241). Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Wainer, H., & Thissen, D. (1993). Graphical data analysis. In G. Keren
& C. Lewis (Eds.), A handboolc for data analysis in the behavioral
sciences: Statistical issues (pp. 391-457). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wilkinson, L. (1990). S YGRAPH: The system _/or graphics. Evanston,
IL: SYSTAT.
Yates, F. (1951). The inﬂuence of statistical methods for research workers
on the development of the science of statistics. Journal ofthe American
Statistical A.s'sociation, 46. 19-34.

1003

